Feature/enhance documentation (#64)
IAMconsortium/nomenclature: doc/source/getting_started.rst

“common regions” used in a project.

There are two main classes that the user interacts with when using the nomenclature
package, **DataStructureDefinition** and **RegionProcessor**. Additionally, there are a
number of auxiliary classes which are used by the two main ones to facilitate validation
and region processing, the two most important ones being **CodeList** and
**RegionAggregationMapping** (a full list of all classes can be found in :ref:`api`).

A **DataStructureDefinition** contains **CodeLists** for *variables* (including units)
and *regions* to be used in a model comparison or scenario exercise following the IAMC
data format.

A **CodeList** is a list of "allowed terms" (or codes), where each term can have several
attributes (e.g., description, unit, parent region).

A **RegionProcessor** holds a list of RegionAggregationMappings and a
DataStructureDefinition. This class is used to facilitate region processing for model
comparison studies.

A **RegionAggregationMapping** is a mapping that defines on a per-model basis how model
native regions should be renamed and aggregated to comparison regions.

> 

Reviewer: I would structure the classes either in alphabetical order or as you state by importance (first main and then auxiliary). I'd vote for the latter, so first "DataStructureDefinition" and "RegionProcessor" and then the rest.

Author: Ah yeah I was debating that, good point, I'll change the order by importance.

Minimum working example
-----------------------

This section aims to provide a minimum working example of how to use the nomenclature
package. It is assumed that the variable templates and model mappings already exist.
Details on how those are structured and how to start using nomenclature "from scratch"

> can be found here :ref:`usage`. 

Reviewer: I guess this reference will work once we implement a page with the filename usage.rst

Author: Yes exactly, so I would vote to keep it in as I'll start the next PR for adding that as soon as this one is merged.

The following outlines how to use the nomenclature package:

.. code-block:: python

   # Import the necessary libraries
   import pyam
   from nomenclature import DataStructureDefinition, RegionProcessor
   
   # Initialize DataStructureDefinition and RegionProcessor giving them the
   # directories where the codelists and mappings are defined as input.
   dsd = DataStructureDefinition("definitions/")
   rp = RegionProcessor.from_directory("mappings/", dsd)

>    # Read in the data using pyam

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # Read the data using pyam
```

   iam_results_file = "some file"
   df = pyam.IamDataFrame(iam_results_file)

   # Validate that the data frame only contains allowed regions and variables
   dsd.validate(df)
   # Apply region processing to the data
   df = rp.apply(df)

**Notes**

* The pyam library is required as *DataStructureDefinition.validate()* and
  *RegionProcessor.apply()* take a *pyam.IamDataFrame* as input.

* *DataStructureDefinition* and *RegionProcessor* are initialized from directories
  containing yaml files. See :ref:`dir-structure` for details. 

> * *DataStructureDefinition.apply()* returns none if the data frame only contains   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *DataStructureDefinition.apply()* returns *None* if the data frame only contains   
```

  allowed values and raises an error otherwise.

.. _dir-structure:

Directory structure for definitions and mappings

> ------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: I would move this section up, so one can see the structure first and has a better understanding of the following "Minimum working example". So you gather first all the information you need and it's nice to end the "Getting started" page with a working example.

Author: Ah yeah I was thinking which one to introduce first, the working example or the layout of the directory. Good to hear that it should be the latter first.

This is the directory structure that needs to be in place in order for the validation and region processing to work:

.. code-block:: bash

   .
   ├── definitions
   │   ├── region
   │   │   ├── ...
   │   │   └── regions.yaml
   │   └── variable
   │       ├── ...
   │       └── variable.yaml

>    └── mappings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   └── mappings [optional]
```

Author: Done

       ├── model_a.yaml
       └── ...

**Notes**

> * The names of the *definitions* and *mappings* directories are purely conventional and
>   don't carry any special meaning. As long as *DataStructureDefinition* and
>   *RegionProcessor.from_directory()* are pointed to the correct directories everything
>   will work.

Reviewer 2: No reason to invite users to start using alternative names...
```suggestion
* The **DataStructureDefinition** will be initialized from the *definitions* folder.
   The **RegionProcessor** will be initialized from the *mappings* folder, if it exists.
```

Author: The second part might be a bit misleading as it suggests to me that there is some sort of automated mechanism that checks if a mappings folder exists and only instantiates the region processor if it does.
This is not whats currently implemented. If you run:

```python
dsd = DataStructureDefinition("definitions")
rp = RegionProcessor("mappings", dsd)
```
without a directory called "mappings" you will get an error.
So if we want to advertise the fact that "mappings" is optional we should also make it clear that if there are no mappings, `RegionProcessor` must not be used, otherwise the program will crash.

Reviewer 2: Ok, how about "The optional folder *mappings* can be used to initialize a **RegionProcessor**.

Author: I wrote an explanation for the next update.

* Inside the *definitions* directory each "dimension", in our case *variable* and
  *region*, must live in its own sub-directory.

> * As opposed *definitions* and *mappings*, *variable* and *region* are special names

Reviewer: I think the tests will fail if you don't have a "definitions" folder.

Author: Do you mean the unit tests or the cli? I just took a look and you're right the cli `assert_valid_structure` would fail as it assumes that 'definitions' and 'mappings' are in place.
This is an inconsistency, though as for the actual classes `DataStructureDefinition` and `RegionProcessor` the constructors take a path argument that can be a directory of any name, not just the fixed 'definitions' and 'mappings'. 
I would vote to fix that inconsistency by either:

1. Changing the constructors to only look for these fixed directory names.
2. Add two optional arguments to the CLI to specify the names of the definitions and mappings directories is they are non-standard. The default values for the parameters would be 'definitions' and 'mappings' of course so it's transparent to the user.

I personally would prefer option 2.

Reviewer: Same. @danielhuppmann what do you think?

Reviewer 2: No reason against extending the testing-module - but I still push users into adopting the conventions, see other suggestions.

Author: Sounds good, I've updated the docs.

Getting started
===============

Overview
--------

This package facilitates working with data templates that follow the
format developed by the `Integrated Assessment Modeling Consortium
(IAMC) <https://www.iamconsortium.org>`__. It supports validation of
scenario data and region processing, which consists of renaming and
aggregation of model “native regions” to “common regions” used in a
project.

A **DataStructureDefinition** class contains **CodeLists** for
*variables* (including units) and *regions* to be used in a model
comparison or scenario exercise following the IAMC data format.

A **CodeList** is a list of “allowed terms” (or codes), where each term
can have several attributes (e.g., description, unit, parent region).

A **RegionAggregationMapping** is a mapping that defines on a per-model
basis how model native regions should be renamed and aggregated to
comparison regions.

> A **RegionProcessor** is a class that holds a list of

Reviewer: If the class "DataStructureDefinition" and "RegionAggregationMapping" gets explained in more detail, doesn't it make also sense to add the "RegionProcessor" class? If so I would drop "CodeLists" and move it under the "DataStructureDefinition" class. Then it maybe make sense to only use the classes as headings and skip the "Overview" heading and "The pyam package". Or maybe I just don't understand the structure of this page :)

Author: I'm not sure I fully understand what you mean.
Do you mean adding a dedicated section for the RegionProcessor class? That would probably be a good idea.
I would vote for keeping the overview as it serves both as on overview and a glossary to explain the terms used in the following to the user.

Reviewer: Yes, I meant having for example the following structure analogue to the API documentation:

## Getting started
This package facilitates working with data templates that follow the format developed by the Integrated Assessment Modeling Consortium (IAMC). It supports validation of scenario data and region processing, which consists of renaming and aggregation of model “native regions” to “common regions” used in a project.

### DataStructureDefinition 

A DataStructureDefinition class contains CodeLists for variables (including units) and regions to be used in a model comparison or scenario exercise following the IAMC data format.
A CodeList is a list of “allowed terms” (or codes), where each term can have several attributes (e.g., description, unit, parent region).
...

### RegionAggregationMapping 
...

### RegionProcessor 
...

But as I said maybe I don't understand why the page is structured as it is :)

Reviewer 2: This page is getting quite long for a "getting started" page... I'm afraid that this might scare off potential users.

Author: Shortened the getting started page to a minimum working example.

RegionAggregationMappings and a DataStructureDefinition. This class is
used to facilitate region processing for model comparison studies.

> The structure of a datastructure definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure of a DataStructureDefinition
```

-------------------------------------------

A **DataStructureDefinition** is initialized from a folder with the
following structure:

Variables
~~~~~~~~~

The *variable* codelist of the **DataStructureDefinition** will be read
from all yaml files located in a folder of that name (including any
sub-folders). They must be formatted as a list of dictionaries mapping
the variable (key) to its attributes.

.. code:: yaml

   - Some Variable:
       description: A short description
       unit: A unit
       <other attribute>: Some text (optional)

Every variable must have a **unit**, which should be compatible with the
Python package `iam-units <https://github.com/iamconsortium/units>`__.
The unit attribute can be empty, i.e., the variable is *dimensionless*.

Tags

> ^^^^

Author: Good question I think it should not be there as its application is in principle not limited to variables but could also be extended to regions. Do I understand that correctly @danielhuppmann?
As regions are also part of a DataStructureDefinition I would say it makes sense to move the regions section also under the DataStructureDefinition.
I'm afraid I don't understand what you mean by:

> to many levels under "The structure of a datastructure definition" with to less headings, I guess.

> ^^^^

Reviewer: Sorry for being not precise. I meant having, one heading with one subheading with one sub-subheading (heading 1, 2, 3). I just think it might look better to have at least two headings on each level (2, 3). I hope this is better understandable :sweat_smile:

> ^^^^

Author: Ah right, ok, good point. If we move regions under DataStructureDefinition and move the Tags up one level we should have three subheadings.

> ^^^^

Reviewer 2: Tags should work for all types of codelists, but it is only explicitly tested for variables... Suggest to follow a strategy of "assume it works until proven otherwise, then fix and add tests"...

> ^^^^

Author: Sounds good, I put it at the same level as regions and variables then.

To avoid repetition (and subsequent errors), any number of yaml files
can be used as “tags” using a nested list of dictionaries. The files
defining the tags must have a name starting with ``tag_``.

.. code:: yaml

   - <Tag>:
     - Some Key:
         description: a short description of the key

When importing the codelist, any occurrence of ``<Tag>`` in a variable
name will be replaced by every element in the Tag dictionary. The
``<Tag>`` will also be replaced in any of the variable attributes.

There must be only one top-level entry in any yaml file to be used as
tag.

> Model Mappings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model mappings
```
or RegionAggregationMapping (?)

--------------

Model mappings, defined in a .yaml format serve three different purposes
on a per-model basis:

1. Define a list of model native regions that are to be selected (and
   usually uploaded) from an IAM result. This also serves as an implicit
   exclusion list for model native regions, since only explicitly
   mentioned regions are selected.

2. Allow for renaming of model native regions.

3. Define how model native regions should be aggregated to common
   regions.

This example illustrates how such a model mapping looks like:

.. code:: yaml

   model: model_a
   native_regions:
     - region_a: alternative_name_a
     - region_b
   common_regions:
     - common_region_1:
       - region_a
       - region_b
     - common_region_2:
       - ...

Notes
~~~~~

> -  The names of the three top level keywords ``model``,

Reviewer 2: Using **bold** and `code` styling so often looks very busy, maybe bold for the expected/allowed keywords and italics for referring to values in the example (*region_a*)

Author: Done.

   ``native_regions`` and ``common_regions`` are fixed.
-  Required properties are ``model`` and **at least** either
   ``native_regions`` or ``common_regions``. **Both** are **allowed** as
   well.

> -  **``model``** (str): specifies the model name for which the mapping

Reviewer 2: Using both bold and codes doesn't work...

Author: Changed to just bold.

   applies.
-  **``native_regions``** (list): list of model native regions serves as
   a selection as to which regions to keep.

   -  In the above example ``region_a`` is to be renamed to
      ``alternative_name_a``. This is done by defining a key-value pair
      of ``model_native_name: new_name``.
   -  ``region_b`` is selected but the name is not changed.
   -  Assuming ``model_a`` also defines a third region ``region_c``,
      since it is not mentioned it will be **dropped** from the data.

-  **``common_regions``** (list): list of common regions which will be
   computed as aggregates. They are defined as list entries which
   themselves have a list of constituent regions. These constituent
   regions must be model native regions.

   -  **Important to note** the names of the constituent regions
      **must** refer to the **original** model native region names. In
      the above example ``region_a`` and ``region_b`` and **not**
      ``alternative_name_a``.

> Guidelines and naming convention

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Guidelines and variable naming conventions
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The variable name (code) should adhere to the following conventions:

-  A ``|`` (pipe) character indicates levels of hierarchy
-  Do not use spaces before and after the ``|`` character, but add a

>    space between words (e.g., ``Primary Energy|Non-Biomass Renewables``)

Reviewer 2: Suggest to use parentheses and italics for variable names in any documentation (instead of `code`).

Author: Do you mean variable names in the IAMC sense like 'Primay Energy' here or in the python sense, or both?
How should I use parentheses, like so (*Primary Energy*)?

Reviewer 2: Variable in the IAMC-sense

Author: Alright, updated.

-  Add hierarchy levels where it might be useful in the future, e.g.,
   use ``Electric Vehicle|Plugin-Hybrid`` instead of ‘Plugin-Hybrid
   Electric Vehicle’
-  Do not use abbreviations of statistical operations (‘min’, ‘max’,
   ‘avg’) but always spell out the word
-  Do not include words like ‘Level’ or ‘Quantity’ in the variable,
   because this should be clear from the context or unit

Regions
~~~~~~~

The *region* codelist of the nomenclature will be read from all yaml
files located in a folder of that name (including any sub-folders). To
avoid repeating a “hierarchy” attribute many times (e.g., country,
continent), the yaml files must have a nested dictionary structure:

.. code:: yaml

   - <Hierarchy Level>:
     - Region Name:
         Attribute: Attribute value

When importing the codelist, the hierarchy will be added as attribute,
such that it can be retrieved as

.. code:: python

   DataStructureDefinition.region["Region Name"]["Hierarchy"] = "<Hierarchy Level>"

Other attributes specified in the yaml file can include (for countries)
ISO2/3-codes, or the list of countries included in a macro-region (i.e.,
a continent or large region).

> The pyam package

Reviewer 2: Don't need to include the advertisement section for pyam here...

Author: Done.
